---
title: Rounding algorithms in Python

categories: [Knowledge, Dev]
tags: [basics, python]

pin: false
blog: true

math: false
mermaid: false
---

To round a number in Python you can use the `round()` function. It's straightforward, but there is a nuance to be aware of. When you pass a number that is exactly halfway between two integers to this function, its behavior might be surprising:

```python
round(1.5)
# 2

round(2.5)
# 2
```

This happens because `round()` employs an algorithm known as *bankers' rounding* (BR), instead of *arithmetic rounding* (AR). The key distinction between these algorithms is that for numbers of the form `x + 0.5`, where `x` is even, BR rounds the number down, not up, as it would be with AR.

### The reasony why to use bankers' rounding

When you want to round a single number, using BR algorithm might seem to have no sense, because it appears indeterministic. However, BR becomes advantageous for rounding a large set of numbers due to its statistical benefits. Consider the following set of measurements:

`1, 3, 2.5, 5.5, 6.5, 4, 1.5, 8`

Summing them up and calculating the average yields 32/8 = 4.

If we round each value using (AR) *before* calculating the average, the result changes to 34/8 = 4.25.

There is no objective reason why a number ending in .5 should always be rounded up. Statistically, such numbers should be rounded up and down with 50% probability. BR algorithm ensures this.

### Available workarounds

One of the workarounds to achieve AR in Python is using `int(x+0.5)` instead of `round(x)`. This method is straightforward, but the formula becomes more complex when you want to round the number to *n* digits. For instance, to imitate `round(x, n)`, the formula is:

`int(x + 10**n + 0.5) / 10**n`

---

Another workaround requires using `decimal` library:

```python
from decimal import Decimal

x = 1.556
precision = Decimal('0.00')
float(Decimal(x).quantize(precision))
# 1.56
```
